Second Inaugural Address by Abraham Lincoln. Read by John Greenman for LibriVox.org.
Fellow-Countrymen: At this second appearing to take the oath of the Presidential office
there is less occasion for an extended address than there was at the first.
Then a statement somewhat in detail of a course to be pursued seemed fitting and proper.
Now, at the expiration of four years, during which public declarations have been constantly called forth on every point and phase of the great contest
which still absorbs the attention and engrosses the energies of the nation, little that is new could be presented.
The progress of our arms, upon which all else chiefly depends, is as well known to the public as to myself,
and it is, I trust, reasonably satisfactory and encouraging to all. With high hope for the future, no prediction in regard to it is ventured.
On the occasion corresponding to this four years ago all thoughts were anxiously directed to an impending civil war.
All dreaded it, all sought to avert it. While the inaugural address was being delivered from this place,
devoted altogether to saving the Union without war, insurgent agents were in the city seeking to destroy it without war—
seeking to dissolve the Union and divide effects by negotiation. Both parties deprecated war,
but one of them would make war rather than let the nation survive, and the other would accept war rather than let it perish, and the war came.